[Music]
[Applause]
okay great
who got light is pretty intense
well thank you very much Angela for the
introduction I'd like to thank the
organizers and the sponsors for what
appears to be a very exciting and
informative conference what I'd like to
do this afternoon is present you with a
strategy a strategy that we think will
eventually be the primary way to manage
cancer and I'd like to give background
information first on where this concept
of press pulse originally came from and
then I'd like to briefly go over what we
view as the cancer code and I'll explain
that and then how we apply the press
pulse strategy to a particular type of
cancer called glioblastoma and then I'm
going to show an overview of how the
strategy can be applied for almost every
cancer let's see all right where did
this idea of press pulse come from all
right this is actually derived from the
field of paleo biology it was considered
a mechanism responsible for the mass
extinction of organisms during prior
evolutionary epochs so press disturbance
is produced a chronic stress on
populations while the pulse disturbin
produced an acute stress on populations
but it was only when both of these
stresses coincided was their mass
extinction of organisms so you can see
the connection we take this concept and
now we apply it to the cancer problem
because the goal is to resolve the
disease all right we want to exterminate
cancer cells but we want to do it in
such a way that we don't harm the body
or the organ that we're working with so
before we can understand how to apply a
press pulse therapeutic strategy for the
management of cancer we have to
understand what
this disease is and I put this up here
is the cancer code alright I put it up
there because in my neck of the woods in
Boston Dana Farber comes on the radio
and the TV telling me or us that they
have the cancer code which is based on
the gene theory of cancer alright and we
know from a lot of work the gene theory
is now under attack and as Travis
Kristofferson would say it's becoming a
dead fury so what is cancer
it's a mitochondrial metabolic disease
where fermentation gradually replaces
respiration for cellular energy this is
Warburg's central theory glucose and
glutamine are the major fermentable
fuels for driving cancer growth alright
the cancer cell can ferment other things
in the microenvironment the issue is
there's not enough of those other things
to drive the beast ketone bodies can
replace glucose and normal cells but not
in tumor cells this is because the tumor
cell has defective oxidative
phosphorylation tumor cells are abnormal
the mitochondria and tumor cells are
abnormal ketones cannot be fermented
keep ketones must be respired reactive
oxygen production is greater in tumor
cells than in normal cells the why that
is is because why the Ross don't kill
the tumor cells we've seen that we've
had this debate the other day about the
RUS the reactive oxygen species these
cells are making more of us but they're
not dying they're not dying because
they're fermenting glucose and glutamine
which produces tremendous antioxidant
capacity in these cells so even though
they're making more Ross they're
actually protecting themselves by
fermenting these particular fuels cancer
mutations arise as an effect and are not
the cause of destabilized energy
metabolism this is very important
because the somatic mutation theory is
chasing all these gene mutations right
these are effects they're not the course
they're red herrings field is wasting
massive amount of time chasing those
things
it's the metabolism that's causing those
things that's a randomness cancer
mutations make tumour cells more
vulnerable to energy stress than normal
cells how do you think appears a cell
full of mutation broken chromosomes you
think that cell is going to be tough
when put under energy
dress every cell in our body earned the
right to be here
are we have an evolutionary history of
survival extreme stress in the
environment and then all of a sudden
we're claiming that these cells with all
kinds of broken promise ohms and
mutations are going to be more fit than
the cells that we have that evolved
wrong those cells are weak and we just
have to know how to exploit their
weaknesses glutamine addicted neoplastic
macrophage Fusion Hybrid is the origin
of the metastatic cancer cell these
cells naturally have the capacity to
enter and exit tissues live in the
bloodstream suppress the immune system
all right this is the cell that we're
dealing with these cells evolved to live
in hypoxic environments they're tough
cells to kill the press pulse
therapeutic strategy is going to
possibly manage and possibly resolve the
disease as I'll explain to you and we're
going to I'm going to demonstrate this
with glioblastoma multiforme II among
the most aggressive of all primary
tumors poor prognosis we know this no
effective therapies composed of multiple
cell types consequently the term multi
for me because there's different forms
of the cells there are stem cells and
neoplastic mizenko microglia in this
commission of cells the stem cells will
grow like crazy but they are not the
cells that invade throughout the brain
they cause mass displacement of tissue
it's the neoplastic ms entacle of
microglia that invade through the brain
and they invade using the secondary
structures of Scherrer which would
describe many years ago by Professor
Shara their anatomical regions in the
brain and the tumor cells will use these
anatomical regions to spread throughout
the brain consequently becomes almost
impossible to cure can't GBM with
surgery alone and the other
characteristic of this tumor is they
metastasize when GBM cells escaped from
the brain and get into the body and they
spread like crazy powerful metastatic
disease unfortunately it doesn't happen
very often but when it does it's
devastating now this is a cross-section
through the brain of a person who died
from GBM and you can see the large
necrotic area cystic area you can also
you see the compression of the of the
ventricle most of the patients who die
from this disease die from into cranial
pressure so and
issue the normal-appearing brain area
let's see if i can get that here okay
they're laced with tumor so you just
can't see them they're not that obvious
but they get to the other side of the
brain they go they use blood vessels all
right they use these blood vessels as
railroad tracks and other anatomical
regions to spread throughout the brain
that's why you can't cure these things
with surgery because these tumor cells
are already spread throughout the brain
and they use blood vessels as one of the
means to do this they go across the
vehicle robbing space on the like like
like railroad tracks and immuno
therapies can't get to these guys
they're on the opposite side of the
brain that's why that's not gonna work
now the other thing is the mitochondria
damaged in GBM
all right look at the mic this is a
normal mitochondria stripes those
stripes of cristae they contain the
proteins and the lipids that are
responsible for electron transport the
oxidative phosphorylation capacity of
the south this is a mitochondrion of a
GBM a large matrix small amount of
Christic crystallises structure dictates
function if the very structures needed
for oxidative phosphorylation are
damaged or missing the cell can't get
energy from oxidative phosphorylation
it's just that simple
so how is this cell going to survive it
has to ferment what does it ferment
glucose and glutamine now this is
another work from Ruth's Titans group
where she looked at the did a big
proteomic analysis in GBM and they were
looking at normal mitochondria and
abnormal so if you look at normal
mitochondria most of the normal
mitochondria are found a normal brain
brain sections and and are and not in
the GBM have very low normal
mitochondria just the opposite abnormal
mitochondria are enriched in the GBM and
very very few in normal brain regions
and you can see see these densed cristae
those are normal looking mitochondrial
here's in the GBM you see and you see
all the Cris take these cells can't
respire how people say these cells can
respond makes no sense to me anatomical
structures are here what people have to
do is look at the data
now what's driving this disease what's
driving the Beast
it's glucose and glutamine they're
fermenting so glucose comes in through
the glucose transporters and a Christos
just gave us some instruction on this
glucose 6-phosphate Emden Meyerhoff
Parnes pathway to produce lactic acid
now you there's some debate yeah might
not be as much energy coming from the
substrate level phosphorylation and
glycolysis but that's probably some in
some tumors maybe more in others lactic
acid is dumped out causes acidification
of the microenvironment contribute
contribute to wound healing and all the
angiogenic factors that you see also
glucose 6 can go down the pentose
phosphate pathway producing ribose
5-phosphate a precursor for a nucleotide
synthesis it also produces NADPH a
substrate for glutathione
and as I said the glutathione is an
antioxidant system it's one of the main
oxidant antioxidant systems so we're
keeping our antioxidant levels high at
the same time the glutamine is coming
into these cells and split through the
glutamine ace to glutamate and ammonia
the ammonia from the amide nitrogen is
used as a precursor for nucleotide
synthesis so some of the glutamate is
pumped back out into the micro
environment that we know that glutamate
in the micro environment allows these
cells to become even more aggressive
because the cells are going to be
excited toxic death is going to
contribute from all this glutamate
glutamate dumping and as we just heard
from Christos the glutamate can drive
substrate level phosphorylation in the
TCA cycle to very high levels so these
cells are getting their energy their
metabolites and also the glutamate is
part of the glutathione complex so
glutamine and glucose are building a
very powerful antioxidant building all
the metabolites that you need to grow
the Beast all right how many therapies
are we using to stop this how many of
the drug therapies the immunotherapies
all the things that we're using to stop
this are we doing this I don't know of
any that are doing that are combining
both together simultaneously now what do
we do for the standard of care all right
so we take somebody diagnosed with the
GBM before they even have the
opportunity to really understand what's
going on we do surgically pump the bulky
so we take the surgery out it's like
hitting a beat by beehive in the middle
of the day the bees come flying out
alright so you create a wound and that
wound is now going to initiate these
tumor cells to start spreading as soon
as the patient has the opportunity we
start a rating radiating that person
with high-dose radiation
creating the chronic environment
breaking apart the glutamine glutamate
cycle freedom glutamine that goes into
the tumor cells to drive their
fermentation metabolism okay we create a
necrotic environment excited toxic death
the head begins to swell we have edema
how do we stop edema we throw in massive
doses of steroids dexamethasone which
elevates blood sugar blood sugar the
other component for driving the beast
so the standard of care is creating
environment to make sure that tumor or
to facilitate that tumors recurrence
alright so and these things are many of
them are affected with human
cytomegalovirus which is a supercharger
for Drive and glucose and glutamine into
those tumor cells the worst condition
and when Adrienne said the other day
GBM is a perfect storm the perfect storm
is created by the standard of care and
look at the results here we're radiating
these poor people nobody survived
zero survivors this is from one of the
snooper protocols and that we use
radiation Tim as Olamide we get it we
get a few extra survivors but if you
look at it five six is added five
hundred at one point one percent of the
people treated what do you expect from a
therapy that's creating the perfect
environment for the fermentation of
these cells you would not expect
anything different from this make
matters worse you throw in this toxic
alkylating agent Emma's Olamide which
increases driver mutation I'd makes no
sense at all because these people have a
little bit of an entry increase in
progression-free survival from a drug
that increases driver mutations what
does that mean nonsense this whole thing
about the gene theory is just such
nonsense
now I put this I put this up here this
is remembering Brittany Maynard
tragic tragic situation you may have
read about her in People magazine
all these kinds of things I mean here
she was right after she got married she
she she was operated for by a low grade
low grade and within it was in a few
weeks that turned into a high grade
tumor
all right GBM unbelievable so she says
she's taken the standard of care she's I
don't want to go through this so you can
see look at her here that's moon face
that's from high-dose steroids that
she's receiving that's the result of
that she said I don't want to go through
this anymore right so she goes to she's
lifting and California goes to Oregon
right to die so she dies with dignity on
November 1st within less than a year
right so so the question is in this
article so all the morality of right to
die discussions nothing about the
failure of the standard of care if the
standard of care weren't so bad maybe
she wouldn't have to couldn't have to do
this now here's Pablo Kelly made know an
alternative choice all right
recent paper this came out at last
summer July 15 2016 in the English paper
Herald Express diagnosed with GBM he's
approximately the same age with Brittany
diagnosed with GBM in August 2014 he
decides no radiation no chemo nothing no
standard of care just ketogenic diet and
supplements and I emailed him just a
week ago and he's doing fine I mean he's
he's he's working through the system but
this summer he'll be out three years he
didn't have to go to Oregon you know the
issue here there are choices people can
make choices when they have the
information needed to make the correct
choice now if we're going to develop
therapies that work and therapies that
can resolve and manage this disease you
we need good preclinical mouse models or
animal models for the disease and we've
built one of the best models that there
is that replicates all of the major
characteristics that you see in human
glioblastoma
that's the vm3 model and Christos just
mentioned that a moment ago it
replicates all of the major growth
characteristics of the human brain
including extra neural metastases it's a
spontaneous to MERS arise spontaneously
in the mouse that is sinchon egg in
munich is a normal immune system and the
genetic background of the tumor and the
host is the same and
even has neural extra neural metastases
if you have a good model of glioblastoma
animal model grow it take it and grow it
outside and if it spreads throughout the
mouse that's the model that you want if
it grows us a big ball
that's a stem cell tumor you can kill
those easy the spreading ones are much
more difficult I also want to mention
Pablo is not alone there are many more
people now going down Pablo's route
Andrew Scarborough is here he's another
individual and I spoke to Andrew and
Andrew Stelling me more and more people
to choosing the Pablo path now the other
thing here is that we how these tumor
cells rip through the mouse's brain is
the same as they ripping through the
human brain
they grow across the surface they grow
across myelinated fiber tracts inter
fascicular through the ventricles look
at this beautiful tumor cells around the
blood vessel just like I showed you with
the human GBM they're using these blood
vessels as railroad tracks to get
through the brain among some of these
other structures that's why it's so hard
to kill these tumors now of course I got
into this Jeep this ketogenic diet a
while ago calorie restriction ketogenic
diet it was working really well and a
lot of tumors it wasn't working on this
to this extent that we would thought it
would work look this is an ounce that
eats only once you put the tumor cells
in the brain and they rip they invade
right through you can see these chunks
of - well in advance of the major tumor
right here you put it into this brain
and this guy we calorie restricted and
we use calorie restricted ketogenic
diets to deoxy glucose calorie
restriction and my students were saying
to me it's not going down like the other
tumors what's wrong with this tumor how
come this tumor it refuses to be beaten
down by calorie restricted ketogenic
diets we damn near starve this mouse to
death to see if we could couldn't stop
the tumor now what it did do is it's it
significantly reduced invasion so the
invasive properties of the tumor were
markedly reduced but we weren't killing
the majority of the tumor cells why are
these guys surviving when we're throwing
the kitchen sink at them and we threw
Tim as Olamide at this guy - we couldn't
stop it do you think it could be the
glutamine
so we chose this to test the hypothesis
we used on six days oh five oXXO neural
leucine it's a glutamine analogue it
comes in it blocks the glutamine ace
activity you can't take it up it just
gums up the whole glutamine system it
reduces TCA cycle substrate level
phosphorylation which we just heard from
dr. Christoffel is and it also halts DNA
and RNA synthesis what happens when we
treat these tumors now with the
ketogenic diet and this glutamine
inhibitor alright so this is our
strategy that's the way we do things in
in our lab we don't put cells in the
brain
we put a fragment of the coven of a
tumor from another Mouse into the brain
so that tumor already has a micro
environment ready to go it's a stage for
GBM as soon as we put it into the brain
or we don't use cells that are that you
start treating with cells you get good
results you tried putting a chunk in
there when it's already you've got a
micro environment you see what happens
we let it go for three days now it's a
stage for it here and then we've put
them on a fast fast them all the mice
all the night and then we give them back
either high card diet or ketogenic diet
restricted and then we wait a few more
days to let this thing you know really
settle in and then we use pulsing with
done every other day either 0.5 or 1.5
make and then we terminate we use in
vivo bioluminescence imaging ex vivo
imaging take the brain out of the mouse
put it in the dish and bioluminescent
because living the bioluminescence will
pick up the living cells well we said
wow how come these guys are only with it
why don't we stop at 15 because the
guy's chomping down on the hard carbs
are dying they're starting to get more
but at 14 15 days of age and so fast we
already put a stage 4 brain tumor in
these mice all right you have to realize
this so now we're going to look at the
data this is under unpublished
observations that I thought I'd the need
to share with you alright so we use
bioluminescence imaging and here's the
guys eating the high carbohydrate
standard diet with no treatment so
they're the control for for the for the
study and then using the dawn by itself
we got a 44% reduction of the growth of
the tumor the light so we absence of
light means you're killing the tumor
cells and I'll show you the evidence
the diet by itself had some minor effect
it stops invasion but as you can see
we're not slaughtering these tumor cells
with that with the diet alone we put the
diet and the drug and we got a powerful
synergy between the diet and the drug
and some of these mice had no light so
we went back and repeated the experiment
only this time using a higher
concentration of Don just a little bit
higher and using the the ketogenic diet
restricted now as our control this is
the group that usually mostly represents
your experimental and other studies
we're using this as the control compared
with the with the diet and the drug so
we're pressing with we're pressing the
system with the diet and we're pulsing
the system with the done and what we
found is that this is background like
well almost no like only one guy has a
significant amount of light in this in
the in the in the treated group and it
turned out this was the one mouse that
was looking a little finicky and we said
let's pull it let's not inject him today
so we didn't inject him he was the only
guy that had a little bit of light left
this with one missing one one one
injection so we do the Annette average
of this and we a massive unbelievable
amount of death and reduction when we
targeted both the glucose that with the
ketones and and the dawn as a pulse and
this is what it looks like when you put
it in the in the petri dish so we take
the brain out of the mouse you can see
it here and that we do the
bioluminescence imaging standard high
carb diets ripping okay they they
they're out of the program in 14 15 days
the ketogenic diet guys yeah you have a
lot of light I told you the ketogenic
diet alone is not going to resolve these
GBM at least this one and the fact that
humans do so much better than the mice
is blowing my mind
you know I it's humans do much better
than the mice and then if you put the
two together the the restricted diet
without unike we got no light
what does they have no light does that
mean there's no GBM that means this
result so we said let's do the histology
on this thing and see what's going on
inside the brains of these guys so H&E
staining a pathological necessity if
you're going to prove anything in
neuropathology you have to do H&E
staining so what you have here is you
have standard diet unrestricted look at
the mass of the tumor and you can see
the tumor cells migrating to invading I
should say into this white this is the
invasion as that's not the low power
under high power these cells are so
healthy
these cells are growing they're packed
their pilot on top of each other massive
cell density mitotic figures this is
like what you see in human GBM now look
at here's the calor the ketogenic diet
restricted there's a sharper demarcation
again the invasion is slowed down and
there's more spacing between the cells
but the cells are not dying now there's
some that are but basically they're
alive so then we put the diet and the
dawn together and we got mass of death
as my associate Poorna Mukherjee said
you've got a battle field here this is
slaughter at the highest level these are
not live cells these are fragments of
cells all right and this is consistent
with the fact that there's no light I
don't know if we cured this mouse we
didn't do the full studies I don't know
if we resolved this mouse completely all
I know is there's no light and we got
massive death and if you know them
here's another very important and very
interesting observation from this study
it turns out that when you give the dawn
here's the amount you get into the tumor
in the brain on this on the high carb
diet but with ketogenic diet we got
almost twice as much done drug on target
is the ketogenic diet is we saw this a
long time ago for another drug alright
it was a drug that we were using for
treating gangliosides storage disease
and when we gave it under a ketogenic
diet we delivered three times more drug
to the brain so I'm not really sure
what's going on here mechanistically but
it's very interesting and then this is
the work from Angela and Dominic and as
I said if you have a good model of
glioblastoma and you put it in the flank
it should spread throughout the mouse
and that's exactly what we're seeing
here labeled tumor cells implanted
subcutaneously and they were using now
hyperbaric oxygen as as the pulse and
the diet as the press and the oxygen you
know how little effect the diet of
course has has a little bit more effect
but it's new you're not resolving and
when you put the two together you get
synergy press pulse now this is the we
have this figure Dominic and I we have a
paper that we've submitted for it's
under review
but we built this figure as an example
of the strategy that we plan to use to
manage and hopefully resolve cancer what
I did was you
da Vinci's Vitruvian Man symbol what we
did so we have an individual who's who
has metastatic cancer and we're going to
try to manage the metastatic cancer and
then we're going to try to resolve the
metastatic cancer whether that's colon
whether it's breast whether it's brain
bladder whatever this the strategy will
work because all the tumor cells are the
same disease cancer is a singular
disease of energy metabolism thriving on
fermentation fuels so the way to manage
the disease you have to press the end
you have to pulse press therapies can
involve but not exclusively restricted
ketogenic diets and sometimes you don't
need to restrict the diet and you can
have various various combinations of the
diet Paleo ketogenic diets some people
respond better to one type and another
fat composition of the diet plays an
important role so you need to know that
ketone supplements can be very important
as a continual press on the system
stress management is extremely important
if we're going to resolve cancer people
get emotionally freaked out when they
have cancer believe me they get
depression they get all kinds of things
if you're not able to deal with their
emotional stress it's not going to
resolve as quickly as it could and we
use what is this we use exercise therapy
yoga therapy if necessary music therapy
there's a variety of different therapies
that actually can reduce physiological
stress and that's that we keep on the
patients so they feel good all the time
you want to keep their spirits up you
want to keep them involved in the
management of their disease and then
while this is going on we then Institute
press their pulse therapies which is
glucose inhibition we can take part of
that is coming from the diet but we can
boost that up a little bit when we use
glucose inhibitors to deoxy glucose
Florida there's a whole range of drugs
that could be applied here then we have
glutamine inhibitors I just gave you an
example of Don okay because we were just
trying to test hypothesis just to test
the hypothesis so we there might be
other glutamine inhibitors that could
work as well and then we have hyperbaric
oxygen so we have these are all press or
pulse therapies now the strategy is
called dosing timing and scheduling how
much doses do we use what is the dosage
when and for how long
we do this and what is the schedule
alright which comes first this one that
one how do we schedule this and in the
intermediate periods we can earn back
certain therapies there inhale enhance
the health and vitality of the person so
what we're going to do is use this this
is a new novel therapeutic strategy for
the for the metabolic management of
cancer and it is my opinion that this
end time will eventually make most other
standard therapies for cancer obsolete
because this is based on the biology of
the system on the biochemistry of the
system and not some genetic nonsense of
the system ok I'd like to thank the
collaborators that have been working
with me on this and I especially like to
thank a single cause single cure
foundation that Travis Kristofferson has
set up it's a beacon he's one of the few
guys that really understands the nature
of the problem and people like Ed Miller
who support this is very important
George Yeo foundation these people's
symptoms seem to understand the nature
of the problem I don't know why these
few people understand it should be a lot
more other people understanding what the
problem is it's almost like there's some
sort of a wall to prevent people from
understanding what I just told you and
of course my own research and thank you
for your attention
[Applause]